Add blog post for EKS Auto Mode (#13529)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/aws-eks-auto-mode/index.md

- **Networking Simplification**: Automatically configures and manages core networking components like Load Balancers.

This significantly reduces the operational overhead of running Kubernetes clusters. Instead of spending time on infrastructure decisions and maintenance, teams can now focus on their applications. For example, deploying a stateful application with load balancing no longer requires setting up and maintaining multiple add-ons and configurations - Auto Mode handles this automatically while following AWS best practices.

Common tasks that previously required significant expertise and time are now managed by AWS, making it simpler to run production-grade Kubernetes workloads. This includes:

- Setting up and maintaining cluster autoscaling
- Configuring and updating networking plugins
- Managing storage drivers and volume provisioning
- Handling node updates and security patches
- Optimizing instance selection and placement

## Pulumi Support for EKS Auto Mode

We have added EKS Auto Mode support across our AWS provider ecosystem:

> - Pulumi AWS Provider (v6.63.0+)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pulumi AWS Provider](/registry/packages/aws/) (v6.63.0+)
```

> - Pulumi AWS Cloud Control Provider (v1.13.0+)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pulumi AWS Cloud Control Provider](/registry/packages/aws-native/) (previously known as Pulumi AWS Native) (v1.13.0+)
```

> - Pulumi EKS Provider (TODO: upcoming release)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pulumi EKS Provider ](/registry/packages/eks/)(TODO: upcoming release)
```

---
title: "Getting Started with Amazon EKS Auto Mode in Pulumi"
date: 2024-12-05T22:06:21+01:00
draft: false
meta_desc: "Learn how to use Amazon EKS Auto Mode with Pulumi to streamline your Kubernetes cluster management"
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
    - florian-stadler
tags:
    - aws
    - eks
    - kubernetes
---

AWS recently announced [Amazon EKS Auto Mode](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/auto-mode/), a significant enhancement to Amazon EKS that streamlines cluster management by automating infrastructure decisions and operations. Today, we are excited to announce that Pulumi fully supports EKS Auto Mode across our AWS provider ecosystem, enabling you to leverage this powerful feature through infrastructure as code.

<!--more-->

## What is EKS Auto Mode?

> EKS Auto Mode extends AWS management beyond the Kubernetes control plane to the underlying infrastructure that powers your workloads. It automates critical aspects of cluster operations including:

Reviewer 2: I think that despite linking out to the AWS docs, this section could handle a bit more detail on how it automates k8s clusters, and how that makes things easier and faster.

The Pulumi wrapper is really cool, definitely don't mean to knock it - but from the Pulumi side all the magic lies in the fact that yes, you can use Pulumi for this. Hence, it doesn't hurt to do a secondary plug for "why would I want to use Auto Mode anyway".

Author: Good point! I added some more details to this section

- Compute provisioning, autoscaling and ongoing optimization
- Storage configuration and management
- Load balancer setup and integration
- Network Policy enforcement
- OS update and patch management

This automation significantly reduces the operational overhead of running Kubernetes clusters, allowing teams to focus on application development rather than infrastructure management.

## Pulumi Support for EKS Auto Mode

We have added EKS Auto Mode support across our AWS provider ecosystem:

- AWS Native Provider (v6.63.0+)
- AWS Cloud Control Provider (v1.13.0+)

> - Pulumi EKS Provider (TODO: upcoming release)

Reviewer 2: Should we mention AWS Classic here?

Author: Uh good catch, the first item is actually classic and I called it native 🤦

      cidrBlock: "10.0.0.0/16"
      # Necessary tags for EKS Auto Mode to identify the subnets for the load balancers.
      # See: https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.1/deploy/subnet_discovery/
      subnetSpecs:
        - type: "Public"
          tags:
            kubernetes.io/cluster/eks-auto-mode-demo: shared
            kubernetes.io/role/elb: "1"
        - type: "Private"
          tags:
            kubernetes.io/cluster/eks-auto-mode-demo: shared
            kubernetes.io/role/internal-elb: "1"
      subnetStrategy: "Auto"
  cluster:
    type: eks:Cluster
    properties:
      name: eks-auto-mode-demo
      # EKS Auto Mode requires Access Entries, use either the `Api` or `ApiAndConfigMap` authentication mode.
      authenticationMode: API
      skipDefaultNodeGroup: true
      skipDefaultSecurityGroups: true
      vpcId: ${eksVpc.vpcId}
      publicSubnetIds: ${eksVpc.publicSubnetIds}
      privateSubnetIds: ${eksVpc.privateSubnetIds}
      # Enables compute, storage and load balancing for the cluster.
      autoMode:
        enabled: true
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

## Deploying a Load-Balanced Application

> Let's deploy a simple web application fronted by an Application Load Balancer now that EKS Auto Mode is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have provisioned an EKS cluster with Auto Mode enabled, let's deploy a web application fronted by an Application Load Balancer.
```

> EKS Auto Mode will automatically provisions appropriately sized nodes for your workload, set up the Application Load Balancer according

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EKS Auto Mode will automatically provision appropriately sized nodes for your workload, set up the Application Load Balancer according
```

> to the Ingress configuration and manage ongoing maintenance and updates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the Ingress configuration, and manage ongoing maintenance and updates.
```

(sorry I think the Oxford comma makes for easier reading here! 🙈 )

        labels:
          app.kubernetes.io/name: LoadBalancerController
        name: alb
      spec:
        controller: eks.amazonaws.com/alb
    options:
      provider: ${k8sProvider}
  ingress:
    type: kubernetes:networking.k8s.io/v1:Ingress
    properties:
      metadata:
        namespace: ${ns.metadata.name}
        annotations:
          alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/scheme: internet-facing
          alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/target-type: ip
      spec:
        ingressClassName: ${ingressClass.metadata.name}
        rules:
          - http:
              paths:
                - path: /
                  pathType: Prefix
                  backend:
                    service:
                      name: ${service.metadata.name}
                      port:
                        number: 80
    options:
      provider: ${k8sProvider}
outputs:
  url: ${ingress.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

After deploying this with `pulumi up`, you can access your application with `curl` once the Load Balancer has been provisioned:

```bash
~ curl $(pulumi stack output url)
Hello, Pulumi!
```

## Deploying a Stateful Workload

> EKS Auto Mode simplifies persistent storage management by automatically handling EBS volume provisioning for your stateful workloads. To leverage this feature you can create a `StorageClass` that uses the EBS CSI driver (`ebs.csi.eks.amazonaws.com`) as its provisioner. EKS Auto Mode will then automatically manage the lifecycle of your persistent volumes, including provisioning, attaching, and cleanup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
EKS Auto Mode simplifies persistent storage management by automatically handling EBS volume provisioning for your stateful workloads. To leverage this feature, you can create a `StorageClass` that uses the EBS CSI driver (`ebs.csi.eks.amazonaws.com`) as its provisioner. EKS Auto Mode will then automatically manage the lifecycle of your persistent volumes, including provisioning, attaching, and cleanup.
```

                command: ["/usr/local/bin/bash"]
                args: ["-c", "while true; do echo $(date -u) >> /data/out.txt; sleep 60; done"]
                resources:
                  requests:
                    cpu: "1"
                volumeMounts:
                  - name: persistent-storage
                    mountPath: /data
            volumes:
              - name: persistent-storage
                persistentVolumeClaim:
                  claimName: ${pvc.metadata.name}
    options:
      provider: ${k8sProvider}
outputs:
  url: ${ingress.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}
```

{{% /choosable %}}

{{< /chooser >}}

## Summary

EKS Auto Mode represents a significant step forward in simplifying Kubernetes operations on AWS. Pulumi's support for this feature allows you
to define EKS Auto Mode clusters using your favorite programming language and integrate them with your existing infrastructure code.

To get started with EKS Auto Mode in Pulumi:

1. Update your AWS providers to the latest versions
2. Check out our [EKS documentation](/registry/packages/eks/)
3. Join our [Community Slack](https://slack.pulumi.com/) for support and discussions

> We are excited to see what you build with EKS Auto Mode and Pulumi!

Reviewer 2: love this entire summary! 💟

```typescript
import * as pulumi from "@pulumi/pulumi";
import * as awsx from "@pulumi/awsx";
import * as eks from "@pulumi/eks";
import * as k8s from "@pulumi/kubernetes";
import { SubnetType } from "@pulumi/awsx/ec2";

const config = new pulumi.Config();
const clusterName = config.require("clusterName");

const eksVpc = new awsx.ec2.Vpc("eks-auto-mode", {
    enableDnsHostnames: true,
    cidrBlock: "10.0.0.0/16",
    subnetSpecs: [
        // Necessary tags for EKS Auto Mode to identify the subnets for the load balancers.
        // See: https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.1/deploy/subnet_discovery/
        {type: SubnetType.Public, tags: {[`kubernetes.io/cluster/${clusterName}`]: "shared", "kubernetes.io/role/elb": "1"}},
        {type: SubnetType.Private, tags: {[`kubernetes.io/cluster/${clusterName}`]: "shared", "kubernetes.io/role/internal-elb": "1"}},
    ],
    subnetStrategy: "Auto"
});

const cluster = new eks.Cluster("eks-auto-mode", {
    name: clusterName,
    // EKS Auto Mode requires Access Entries, use either the `Api` or `ApiAndConfigMap` authentication mode.
    authenticationMode: eks.AuthenticationMode.Api,

>     skipDefaultNodeGroup: true,

Reviewer 3: Should we remove these 2 defaults from the example?

Author: Good point, missed updating the examples after updating the PR!
